# U2U1000: Local variable can be inlined or declared const

Category : Performance

Severity : Warning

## Cause

A local variable is initialized with a constant value, and never written to afterwards.

## Rule Description

Variables are storage locations, constants are not. Furthermore, contants enable a series of additional optimizations, 
such as constant propagation and folding.

By making the variable a constant, the code more clearly expresses intent, both to the human reader and to the compiler.

## How to Fix Violations

Use the "inline temporary variable" refactoring to inline the constant expression and remove the variable. 

Alternatively, use the "Make variable constant" code fix to declare a local constant instead of a variable.

## Example

Take this method:

    public static double Circumference(double radius)
    {
        var pi = Math.PI;
        return 2 * pi * radius;
    }

It is compiled into the following IL:

    .method public hidebysig static float64 Circumference(float64 radius) cil managed 
    {
        .maxstack 2
        .locals init (
            [0] float64 pi
        )
    
        ldc.r8 3.1415926535897931
        stloc.0
        ldc.r8 2
        ldloc.0
        mul
        ldarg.0
        mul
        ret
    }

The variable `pi` can be changed to a constant as follows:

    public static double Circumference(double radius)
    {
        const double pi = Math.PI;
        return 2 * pi * radius;
    }

Which results in

    .method public hidebysig static float64 Circumference(float64 radius) cil managed 
    {
        .maxstack 8
    
        ldc.r8 6.2831853071795862
        ldarg.0
        mul
        ret
    }

Notice how the variable has been removed and the value has been inlined.
Notice also that constant folding has been applied.
    
## Related Rules

[U2U1008](U2U1008.md) Parentheses can be used to enable constant evaluation
