# U2U1013: Return types should not cause boxing

Category : Performance

Severity : Warning

## Cause

A method returns an instance of a value type, but is declared to return a reference type, which may cause the value to be boxed.

## Rule Description

Whenever an instance of a value type is converted to an instance of a reference type, it needs to be boxed. This applies to all
reference types, not just `object`, but also interfaces. The only exception is an instance of `Nullable<T>` without a value. Boxing such a 
null value will not actually allocate memory, but return a null reference instead.

Boxing is not the only problem though. Because the caller has less information about the actual type of the value, opportunities for
optimizing the machine code are often reduced.

The warning is not raised on methods that are visible to other assemblies, in which case the conversion may be used to hide implementation
details. It will also not be raised on methods that implement interface methods, or when the actually returned type is less visible than
the method itself.

## How to Fix Violations

Use the code fix to change the return type to reflect the type of the returned value.

## Example

Consider this code:

    private int[] numbers;

    internal IEnumerable<int> GetNumbers()
    {
        return numbers.ToImmutableArray();
    }

The method `GetNumbers()` returns an `ImmutableArray<int>` as an `IEnumerable<int>`, which causes the value to be boxed.

Worse, the efficiency of the caller is reduced as well. For example, it cannot call the `Length` property, but must rely on
the `Enumerable.Count` method instead. Foreach loops and LINQ queries against the value will not use the optimized `ImmutableArray<T>` 
implementation.

Moreover, a caller may assume that it may be beneficial to materialize the `IEnumerable<int>` with `.ToArray()` or `.ToList()` when 
iterating over it multiple times, which is obviously not true.

Consider this [BenchmarkDotNet](http://benchmarkdotnet.org/) benchmark:

    [MemoryDiagnoser]
    public class ToMeasure
    {
        private readonly ImmutableArray<int> numbers = ImmutableArray.Create(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10);

        [Benchmark]
        public void AsEnumerable()
        {
            foreach (int i in GetNumbers1())
            {
            }
        }

        internal IEnumerable<int> GetNumbers1()
        {
            return numbers;
        }

        [Benchmark(Baseline = true)]
        public void AsImmutableArray()
        {
            foreach (int i in GetNumbers2())
            {
            }
        }

        internal ImmutableArray<int> GetNumbers2()
        {
            return numbers;
        }
    }

This is the result summary on one of our test machines:

    BenchmarkDotNet=v0.10.6, OS=Windows 10 Redstone 1 (10.0.14393)
    Processor=Intel Core i7 CPU 860 2.80GHz (Nehalem), ProcessorCount=8
    Frequency=2727695 Hz, Resolution=366.6099 ns, Timer=TSC
      [Host]     : Clr 4.0.30319.42000, 64bit RyuJIT-v4.6.1648.0
      DefaultJob : Clr 4.0.30319.42000, 64bit RyuJIT-v4.6.1648.0
    
    
               Method |     Mean |     Error |    StdDev | Scaled | ScaledSD |  Gen 0 | Allocated |
    ----------------- |---------:|----------:|----------:|-------:|---------:|-------:|----------:|
         AsEnumerable | 84.18 ns | 1.5299 ns | 1.4310 ns |   2.31 |     0.04 | 0.0132 |      56 B |
     AsImmutableArray | 36.41 ns | 0.0963 ns | 0.0697 ns |   1.00 |     0.00 |      - |       0 B |

In this example, returning an `IEnumerable<int>` and looping over it is 2.3 times slower than returning an `ImmutableArray<int>`
and looping over it. Moreover, it allocates 56 bytes of memory, not just for the `IEnumerable<int>` box, but also for the `IEnumerator<int>`,
while looping over the `ImmutableArray<int>` does no allocations at all.

## Related Rules

[U2U1011](U2U1011.md) Return types should be specific  
[U2U1014](U2U1014.md) Parameter types should not cause boxing
[U2U1019](U2U1019.md) Local variable types should not cause boxing  
[U2U1021](U2U1021.md) Field types should not cause boxing  

© 2017 U2U Consult