# U2U1108: StringBuilders should be initialized with capacity

Category : Performance

Severity : Warning

## Cause

The default StringBuilder constructor is called.

## Rule Description

StringBuilders may need to grow when appending to them. When a reasonable guess can be made for the resulting Length, growing can be avoided.

## How to Fix Violations

Call the constructor with an initial capacity.

## Example

Consider this [BenchmarkDotNet](http://benchmarkdotnet.org/) benchmark:

    [MemoryDiagnoser]
    public class ToMeasure
    {
        private readonly string[] strings = Enumerable.Range(0, 1000).Select(i => i.ToString()).ToArray();

        [Benchmark]
        public void WithoutCapacity()
        {
            var sb = new StringBuilder();

            foreach (string s in strings)
            {
                sb.Append('<').Append(s).Append('>');
            }
        }

        [Benchmark(Baseline = true)]
        public void WithCapacity()
        {
            var sb = new StringBuilder(strings.Length * 5);

            foreach (string s in strings)
            {
                sb.Append('<').Append(s).Append('>');
            }
        }
    }

The method `WithoutCapacity` uses the default constructor, while the method `WithCapacity` makes a reasonable guess for the size
of the resulting StringBuilder. Indeed, most strings have a length of 3, so each time through the loop approximately 5 characters
are appended to the StringBuilder.

This is the result summary on one of our test machines:

    BenchmarkDotNet=v0.10.6, OS=Windows 10 Redstone 1 (10.0.14393)
    Processor=Intel Core i7 CPU 860 2.80GHz (Nehalem), ProcessorCount=8
    Frequency=2727695 Hz, Resolution=366.6099 ns, Timer=TSC
      [Host]     : Clr 4.0.30319.42000, 64bit RyuJIT-v4.6.1648.0
      DefaultJob : Clr 4.0.30319.42000, 64bit RyuJIT-v4.6.1648.0
    
    
              Method |     Mean |     Error |    StdDev | Scaled | ScaledSD |  Gen 0 | Allocated |
    ---------------- |---------:|----------:|----------:|-------:|---------:|-------:|----------:|
     WithoutCapacity | 15.89 us | 0.0355 us | 0.0314 us |   1.07 |     0.02 | 4.0588 |  16.71 KB |
        WithCapacity | 14.92 us | 0.2633 us | 0.2463 us |   1.00 |     0.00 | 2.3956 |   9.85 KB |

In this example, the method is 7% slower when using the default constructor. More importantly, when using the default constructor
16.71 KB is allocated, compared to only 9.85 KB when the StringBuilder is initialized with a reasonable capacity. That amounts to
an increase of 70%.

## Related Rules

© 2017 U2U Consult
